# fa_normative_modeling
In this study we developed robust normative models of white matter (WM) organization across the lifespan, using high-quality diffusion MRI data from over 25,000 healthy individuals within an age range of 0 to 100 years old using separate models for each WM tract extracted with the JHU atlas. in the UK Biobank and Human Connectome Project (HCP). These models capture lifespan trajectories of fractional anisotropy (FA), potentially reflecting progressive myelination and structural maturation, followed by age-related degeneration. By accounting for non-Gaussian data distributions and acquisition site effects, our models provide reliable reference baselines across a wide range of ages as well as different scanning conditions and settings. To demonstrate clinical utility, we applied these FA models, along with the previously reported cortical thickness and subcortical volume models, to the HCP Early Psychosis cohort and performed a multiple sparse canonical correlation analysis (CCA) to explore associations between psychotic symptoms and structural brain deviations (cortical thickness, subcortical volume and tract FA). The first CCA mode showed a significant relationship between structural brain deviations derived from normative models and symptom severity. Selection sensitivity analysis highlighted the right uncinate fasciculus and subcortical brain volumes in driving this association. These normative models are valuable tools for identifying individualized WM deviations, enhancing precision in psychiatric assessment and other applications requiring nuanced brain health evaluations.

In this repository you can find the code utilied for processing the dMRI data, training the normative models, quality control of the data and the analysis performed on the resulting z-scores of the HCP-EP dataset inclusing t-test, u-test, msCCA, selection probability, permutation testing as well as the visualization of the respective results. 
